README.md, before:

---
title: Python for Coding Interviews
subtitle: <https://github.com/mmicu/python-for-coding-interviews>
geometry: margin=1in
---

# Introduction

This guide includes a list of several and useful `Python` data structures to know for coding interviews.

It is intended to show the main data structures incorporated in the language
and their useful functions. More advance `Python` features will not be shown here.

Additional material:

| **Topic** | **Link** |
|---|---|
| Python DS | <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html> |
| Python collections | <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html> |
| Time complexity | <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html> |

## Topics

1. [Primitive Types](#primitive-types)
1. [Tuples](#tuples)
1. [Lists](#lists)
1. [Strings](#strings)
1. [Stacks](#stacks)
1. [Queues](#queues)
1. [Sets](#sets)
1. [Hash Tables](#hash-tables)
1. [Heaps](#heaps)
1. [Collections](#collections)
   1. [namedtuple](#collectionsnamedtuple)
   1. [defaultdict](#collectionsdefaultdict)
   1. [Counter](#collectionscounter)
   1. [OrderedDict](#collectionsordereddict)

## Primitive Types

1. Booleans (`bool`).
1. Integers (`int`).
1. Floats (`float`).
1. Strings (`str`).

```python
# Define variables
>>> b, i, f, s = True, 12, 8.31, 'Hello, world!'
>>> type(b)  # <class 'bool'>
>>> type(i)  # <class 'int'>   ~ Unbounded
>>> type(f)  # <class 'float'> ~ Bounded
>>> type(s)  # <class 'str'>

# Type Conversion
>>> str(i)
'12'
>>> float(i)
12.0
>>> str(b)
'True'
>>> int('10')
10
>>> int('10a')  # `ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '10a'`

# Operations
>>> 2 * 2
4
>>> 2 * 2.
4.0
>>> 5 / 2
2.5
>>> 5 // 2  # `//` is the integer division
2
>>> 3 % 2
1

# `min` and `max`
>>> min(4, 2)
2
>>> max(21, 29)
29

# Some useful math functions
>>> abs(-1.2)
1.2
>>> divmod(9, 4)
(2, 1)
>>> 2 ** 3  # Equivalent to `pow(2, 3)`
8

# Math functions from the `math` package
>>> import math
>>> math.ceil(7.2)
8
>>> math.floor(7.2)
7
>>> math.sqrt(4)
2.0

# Pseudo lower and upper bounds
>>> float('-inf')  # Pseudo min-int
-inf
>>> float('inf')  # Pseudo max-int
inf
```

## `range` and `enumerate`

```python
# `range`
>>> list(range(3))  # Equivalent to `range(0, 3)`
[0, 1, 2]
>>> list(range(1, 10, 2))
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
>>> for i in range(3): print(i)
...
0
1
2
>>> for i in range(2, -1, -1): print(i)  # Equivalent to `reversed(range(3))`
...
2
1
0

# `enumerate`
>>> for i, v in enumerate(range(3)): print(i, v)
...
0 0
1 1
2 2
>>> for i, v in enumerate(range(3), start=10): print(i, v)
...
10 0
11 1
12 2

# Reversed `enumerate`
>>> for i, v in reversed(list(enumerate(['a', 'b', 'c']))): print(i, v)
...
2 c
1 b
0 a
```

## Tuples

```python
>>> t = (1, 2, 'str')
>>> type(t)
<class 'tuple'>
>>> t
(1, 2, 'str')
>>> len(t)
3

>>> t[0] = 10  # Tuples are immutable: `TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment`

>>> a, b, c = t  # Unpacking
>>> a
1
>>> b
2
>>> c
'str'
>>> a, _, _ = t  # Unpacking: ignore second and third elements
>>> a
1
```

## Lists

`Python` uses `Timsort` algorithm in `sort` and `sorted` (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timsort>).

```python
# Define a list
>>> l = [1, 2, 'a']
>>> type(l)  # <class 'list'>
>>> len(l)
3
>>> l[0]  # First element of the list
1
>>> l[-1]  # Last element of the list (equivalent to `l[len(l) - 1]`)
'a'

# Slicing
>>> l[:]  # `l[start:end]` which means `[start, end)`
[1, 2, 'a']
>>> l[0:len(l)]  # `start` is 0 and `end` is `len(l)` if omitted
[1, 2, 'a']

# Some useful methods
>>> l.append('b')  # `O(1)`
>>> l.pop()  # `O(1)` just for the last element
'b'
>>> l.pop(0)  # `O(n)` since list must be shifted
1
>>> l
[2, 'a']
>>> l.remove('a')  # `O(n)`
>>> l.remove('b')  # `ValueError: list.remove(x): x not in list`
>>> l
[2]
>>> l.index(2)  # It returns first occurrence (`O(n)`)
0
>>> l.index(12)  # `ValueError: 12 is not in list`

# More compact way to define a list
>>> l = [0] * 5
>>> l
[0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
>>> len(l)
5
>>> [k for k in range(5)]
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> [k for k in reversed(range(5))]
[4, 3, 2, 1, 0]

# Compact way to define 2D arrays
>>> rows, cols = 2, 3
>>> m = [[0] * cols for _ in range(rows)]
>>> len(m) == rows
True
>>> all(len(m[k]) == cols for k in range(rows))
True

# Built-in methods
>>> l = [2, 1, 4, 3]
>>> len(l)
4
>>> min(l)
1
>>> max(l)
4
>>> sum(l)
10
>>> any(v == 4 for v in l)
True
>>> any(v == 5 for v in l)
False
>>> all(v > 0 for v in l)
True

# Sort list in-place (`sort`)
>>> l = [10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> l
[10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> l.sort()  # It changes the original list
>>> l
[0, 1, 2, 10]
>>> l.sort(reverse=True)  # It changes the original list
>>> l
[10, 2, 1, 0]

# Sort a list a return a new one (`sorted`)
>>> l = [10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> sorted(l)  # It returns a new list
[0, 1, 2, 10]
>>> l  # Original list is not sorted
[10, 2, 0, 1]

# Sort by a different key
>>> students = [
...     ('Mark', 21),
...     ('Luke', 20),
...     ('Anna', 18),
... ]
>>> sorted(students, key=lambda s: s[1])  # It returns a new list
[('Anna', 18), ('Luke', 20), ('Mark', 21)]
>>> students.sort(key=lambda s: s[1])  # In-place
>>> students
[('Anna', 18), ('Luke', 20), ('Mark', 21)]
```

## Strings

```python
>>> s = 'Hello, world!'
>>> type(s)  # <class 'str'>
>>> len(s)
13

>>> s[0] = 'h'  # Strings are immutable: `TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment`
>>> s += ' Another string'  # A new string will be created, so concatenation is quite slow

>>> s = 'Hello'
>>> l = list(s)
>>> l
['H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o']
>>> l[0] = 'h'
>>> ''.join(l)
'hello'

>>> 'lo' in s
True
>>> ord('a')
97
>>> chr(97)
'a'
```

## Stacks

```python
>>> stack = []  # We can use a normal list to simulate a stack

>>> stack.append(0)  # `O(1)`
>>> stack.append(1)
>>> stack.append(2)

>>> len(stack)
3

>>> stack[0]  # Bottom of the stack
0
>>> stack[-1]  # Top of the stack
2

>>> stack.pop()  # `O(1)`
2
>>> stack.pop()
1

>>> len(stack)
1

>>> stack.pop()
0

>>> stack.pop()  # `IndexError: pop from empty list`
>>> stack[-1]    # `IndexError: pop from empty list`
```

## Queues

```python
>>> from collections import deque

>>> queue = deque()

# Enqueue -> append()
>>> queue.append(0)  # `O(1)`
>>> queue.append(1)
>>> queue.append(2)

>>> len(queue)
3

>>> queue[0]  # Head of the queue
0
>>> queue[-1]  # Tail of the queue
2

# Dequeue -> popleft()
>>> queue.popleft()  # `O(1)`
0
>>> queue.popleft()
1

>>> len(queue)
2

>>> queue.popleft()
2

>>> len(queue)
0

>>> queue.popleft()  # `IndexError: pop from an empty deque`
>>> queue[0]  # `IndexError: pop from an empty deque`
```

## Sets

```python
>>> s = set()
>>> s.add(1)
>>> s.add(2)
>>> s
{1, 2}
>>> len(s)
2
>>> s.add(1)  # Duplicate elements are not allowed per definition
>>> s
{1, 2}
>>> s.add('a')  # We can mix types
>>> s
{1, 2, 'a'}
>>> 1 in s  # `O(1)`
True
>>> s.remove(1)
>>> s
{2, 'a'}
>>> s.remove(1)  # `KeyError: 1`
>>> s.pop()  # Remove and return an arbitrary element from the set
2

>>> s0 = {1, 2, 'a'}
>>> s0
{1, 2, 'a'}
>>> s1 = set([1, 2, 'a'])
>>> s1
{1, 2, 'a'}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 | s1
{1, 2, 3}
>>> s0.union(s1)  # New set will be returned
{1, 2, 3}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 & s1
{1}
>>> s0.intersection(s1)  # New set will be returned
{1}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 - s1
{2}
>>> s0.difference(s1)
{2}
```

## Hash Tables

```python
>>> d = {'a': 'hello, world', 'b': 11}  # Equivalent to `dict(a='hello, world', b=11)`
>>> type(d)
<class 'dict'>
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world', 'b': 11}

>>> d.keys()
dict_keys(['a', 'b'])
>>> d.values()
dict_values(['hello, world', 11])
>>> for k, v in d.items():
...     print(k, v)
...
a hello, world
b 11

>>> 'a' in d  # `O(1)`
True
>>> 1 in d
False
>>> d['a'] += '!'
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world!', 'b': 11}
>>> d[1] = 'a new element'
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world!', 'b': 11, 1: 'a new element'}

>>> d[0] += 10  # `KeyError: 0`
>>> d.get(0, 1)  # Return `1` as default value since key `0` does not exist
1
>>> d.get(1, '?')  # Key `1` exists, so the actual value will be returned
'a new element'
>>> d.get(10) is None
True
```

## Heaps

The following commands show how to work with a `min heap`.
Currently, `Python` does not have public methods for the `max heap`.
You can overcome this problem by applying one of the following strategies:

1. Invert the value of each number. So, for example, if you want to add
   1, 2 and 3 in the min heap, you can `heappush` -3, -2 and -1.
   When you `heappop` you invert the number again to get the proper value.
   This solution clearly works if your domain is composed by numbers >= 0.
1. [Invert your object comparison](https://stackoverflow.com/a/40455775).

```python
>>> import heapq

>>> min_heap = [3, 2, 1]
>>> heapq.heapify(min_heap)
>>> min_heap
[1, 2, 3]

>>> min_heap = []
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 3)  # `O(log n)`
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 2)
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 1)

>>> min_heap
[1, 3, 2]
>>> len(min_heap)
>>> min_heap[0]
1
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)  # `O(log n)`
1
>>> min_heap
[2, 3]

>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)
2
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)
3
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)  # `IndexError: index out of range`
```

### collections

Container datatypes ([collections package](<https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html>)).

#### collections.namedtuple

```python
>>> from collections import namedtuple

>>> Point = namedtuple('Point', 'x y')

>>> p0 = Point(1, 2)
>>> p0
Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0.x
1
>>> p0.y
2

>>> p1 = Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0 == p1
True

# Python >= 3.6.1
>>> from typing import NamedTuple
>>>
>>> class Point(NamedTuple):
...     x: int
...     y: int
...

>>> p0 = Point(1, 2)
>>> p1 = Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0 == p1
True
```

#### collections.defaultdict

```python
>>> from collections import defaultdict

>>> d = defaultdict(int)
>>> d['x'] += 1
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 1})
>>> d['x'] += 2
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 3})
>>> d['y'] += 10
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 3, 'y': 10})

>>> d = defaultdict(list)
>>> d['x'].append(1)
>>> d['x'].append(2)
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'list'>, {'x': [1, 2]})
```

#### collections.Counter

```python
>>> from collections import Counter

>>> c = Counter('abcabcaa')
>>> c
Counter({'a': 4, 'b': 2, 'c': 2})
>>> c.keys()
dict_keys(['a', 'b', 'c'])
>>> c.items()
dict_items([('a', 4), ('b', 2), ('c', 2)])
>>> for k, v in c.items():
...     print(k, v)
...
a 4
b 2
c 2
>>> c['d']  # It acts as a `defaultdict` for missing keys
0
```

#### collections.OrderedDict

```python
>>> from collections import OrderedDict

>>> d = OrderedDict()

>>> d['first'] = 1
>>> d['second'] = 2
>>> d['third'] = 3
>>> d
OrderedDict([('first', 1), ('second', 2), ('third', 3)])

>>> for k, v in d.items():
...     print(k, v)
...
first 1
second 2
third 3
```

Commit message:

Remove ellipsis and add math.inf

README.md, after:

---
title: Python for Coding Interviews
subtitle: <https://github.com/mmicu/python-for-coding-interviews>
geometry: margin=1in
---

# Introduction

This guide includes a list of several and useful `Python` data structures to know for coding interviews.

It is intended to show the main data structures incorporated in the language
and their useful functions. More advance `Python` features will not be shown here.

Additional material:

| **Topic** | **Link** |
|---|---|
| Python DS | <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html> |
| Python collections | <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html> |
| Time complexity | <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html> |

## Topics

1. [Primitive Types](#primitive-types)
1. [Tuples](#tuples)
1. [Lists](#lists)
1. [Strings](#strings)
1. [Stacks](#stacks)
1. [Queues](#queues)
1. [Sets](#sets)
1. [Hash Tables](#hash-tables)
1. [Heaps](#heaps)
1. [Collections](#collections)
   1. [namedtuple](#collectionsnamedtuple)
   1. [defaultdict](#collectionsdefaultdict)
   1. [Counter](#collectionscounter)
   1. [OrderedDict](#collectionsordereddict)

## Primitive Types

1. Booleans (`bool`).
1. Integers (`int`).
1. Floats (`float`).
1. Strings (`str`).

```python
# Define variables
>>> b, i, f, s = True, 12, 8.31, 'Hello, world!'
>>> type(b)  # <class 'bool'>
>>> type(i)  # <class 'int'>   ~ Unbounded
>>> type(f)  # <class 'float'> ~ Bounded
>>> type(s)  # <class 'str'>

# Type Conversion
>>> str(i)
'12'
>>> float(i)
12.0
>>> str(b)
'True'
>>> int('10')
10
>>> int('10a')  # `ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '10a'`

# Operations
>>> 2 * 2
4
>>> 2 * 2.
4.0
>>> 5 / 2
2.5
>>> 5 // 2  # `//` is the integer division
2
>>> 3 % 2
1

# `min` and `max`
>>> min(4, 2)
2
>>> max(21, 29)
29

# Some useful math functions
>>> abs(-1.2)
1.2
>>> divmod(9, 4)
(2, 1)
>>> 2 ** 3  # Equivalent to `pow(2, 3)`
8

# Math functions from the `math` package
>>> import math
>>> math.ceil(7.2)
8
>>> math.floor(7.2)
7
>>> math.sqrt(4)
2.0

# Pseudo lower and upper bounds
>>> float('-inf')  # Pseudo min-int
-inf
>>> float('inf')  # Pseudo max-int
inf

# Pseudo lower and upper bounds (Python >= 3.5)
>>> import math

>>> math.inf
inf
>>> -math.inf
-inf
```

## `range` and `enumerate`

```python
# `range`
>>> list(range(3))  # Equivalent to `range(0, 3)`
[0, 1, 2]
>>> list(range(1, 10, 2))
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
>>> for i in range(3): print(i)
0
1
2
>>> for i in range(2, -1, -1): print(i)  # Equivalent to `reversed(range(3))`
2
1
0

# `enumerate`
>>> for i, v in enumerate(range(3)): print(i, v)
0 0
1 1
2 2
>>> for i, v in enumerate(range(3), start=10): print(i, v)
10 0
11 1
12 2

# Reversed `enumerate`
>>> for i, v in reversed(list(enumerate(['a', 'b', 'c']))): print(i, v)
2 c
1 b
0 a
```

## Tuples

```python
>>> t = (1, 2, 'str')
>>> type(t)
<class 'tuple'>
>>> t
(1, 2, 'str')
>>> len(t)
3

>>> t[0] = 10  # Tuples are immutable: `TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment`

>>> a, b, c = t  # Unpacking
>>> a
1
>>> b
2
>>> c
'str'
>>> a, _, _ = t  # Unpacking: ignore second and third elements
>>> a
1
```

## Lists

`Python` uses `Timsort` algorithm in `sort` and `sorted` (<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timsort>).

```python
# Define a list
>>> l = [1, 2, 'a']
>>> type(l)  # <class 'list'>
>>> len(l)
3
>>> l[0]  # First element of the list
1
>>> l[-1]  # Last element of the list (equivalent to `l[len(l) - 1]`)
'a'

# Slicing
>>> l[:]  # `l[start:end]` which means `[start, end)`
[1, 2, 'a']
>>> l[0:len(l)]  # `start` is 0 and `end` is `len(l)` if omitted
[1, 2, 'a']

# Some useful methods
>>> l.append('b')  # `O(1)`
>>> l.pop()  # `O(1)` just for the last element
'b'
>>> l.pop(0)  # `O(n)` since list must be shifted
1
>>> l
[2, 'a']
>>> l.remove('a')  # `O(n)`
>>> l.remove('b')  # `ValueError: list.remove(x): x not in list`
>>> l
[2]
>>> l.index(2)  # It returns first occurrence (`O(n)`)
0
>>> l.index(12)  # `ValueError: 12 is not in list`

# More compact way to define a list
>>> l = [0] * 5
>>> l
[0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
>>> len(l)
5
>>> [k for k in range(5)]
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> [k for k in reversed(range(5))]
[4, 3, 2, 1, 0]

# Compact way to define 2D arrays
>>> rows, cols = 2, 3
>>> m = [[0] * cols for _ in range(rows)]
>>> len(m) == rows
True
>>> all(len(m[k]) == cols for k in range(rows))
True

# Built-in methods
>>> l = [2, 1, 4, 3]
>>> len(l)
4
>>> min(l)
1
>>> max(l)
4
>>> sum(l)
10
>>> any(v == 4 for v in l)
True
>>> any(v == 5 for v in l)
False
>>> all(v > 0 for v in l)
True

# Sort list in-place (`sort`)
>>> l = [10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> l
[10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> l.sort()  # It changes the original list
>>> l
[0, 1, 2, 10]
>>> l.sort(reverse=True)  # It changes the original list
>>> l
[10, 2, 1, 0]

# Sort a list a return a new one (`sorted`)
>>> l = [10, 2, 0, 1]
>>> sorted(l)  # It returns a new list
[0, 1, 2, 10]
>>> l  # Original list is not sorted
[10, 2, 0, 1]

# Sort by a different key
>>> students = [
    ('Mark', 21),
    ('Luke', 20),
    ('Anna', 18),
]
>>> sorted(students, key=lambda s: s[1])  # It returns a new list
[('Anna', 18), ('Luke', 20), ('Mark', 21)]
>>> students.sort(key=lambda s: s[1])  # In-place
>>> students
[('Anna', 18), ('Luke', 20), ('Mark', 21)]
```

## Strings

```python
>>> s = 'Hello, world!'
>>> type(s)  # <class 'str'>
>>> len(s)
13

>>> s[0] = 'h'  # Strings are immutable: `TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment`
>>> s += ' Another string'  # A new string will be created, so concatenation is quite slow

>>> s = 'Hello'
>>> l = list(s)
>>> l
['H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o']
>>> l[0] = 'h'
>>> ''.join(l)
'hello'

>>> 'lo' in s
True
>>> ord('a')
97
>>> chr(97)
'a'
```

## Stacks

```python
>>> stack = []  # We can use a normal list to simulate a stack

>>> stack.append(0)  # `O(1)`
>>> stack.append(1)
>>> stack.append(2)

>>> len(stack)
3

>>> stack[0]  # Bottom of the stack
0
>>> stack[-1]  # Top of the stack
2

>>> stack.pop()  # `O(1)`
2
>>> stack.pop()
1

>>> len(stack)
1

>>> stack.pop()
0

>>> stack.pop()  # `IndexError: pop from empty list`
>>> stack[-1]    # `IndexError: pop from empty list`
```

## Queues

```python
>>> from collections import deque

>>> queue = deque()

# Enqueue -> append()
>>> queue.append(0)  # `O(1)`
>>> queue.append(1)
>>> queue.append(2)

>>> len(queue)
3

>>> queue[0]  # Head of the queue
0
>>> queue[-1]  # Tail of the queue
2

# Dequeue -> popleft()
>>> queue.popleft()  # `O(1)`
0
>>> queue.popleft()
1

>>> len(queue)
2

>>> queue.popleft()
2

>>> len(queue)
0

>>> queue.popleft()  # `IndexError: pop from an empty deque`
>>> queue[0]  # `IndexError: pop from an empty deque`
```

## Sets

```python
>>> s = set()
>>> s.add(1)
>>> s.add(2)
>>> s
{1, 2}
>>> len(s)
2
>>> s.add(1)  # Duplicate elements are not allowed per definition
>>> s
{1, 2}
>>> s.add('a')  # We can mix types
>>> s
{1, 2, 'a'}
>>> 1 in s  # `O(1)`
True
>>> s.remove(1)
>>> s
{2, 'a'}
>>> s.remove(1)  # `KeyError: 1`
>>> s.pop()  # Remove and return an arbitrary element from the set
2

>>> s0 = {1, 2, 'a'}
>>> s0
{1, 2, 'a'}
>>> s1 = set([1, 2, 'a'])
>>> s1
{1, 2, 'a'}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 | s1
{1, 2, 3}
>>> s0.union(s1)  # New set will be returned
{1, 2, 3}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 & s1
{1}
>>> s0.intersection(s1)  # New set will be returned
{1}

>>> s0 = {1, 2}
>>> s1 = {1, 3}
>>> s0 - s1
{2}
>>> s0.difference(s1)
{2}
```

## Hash Tables

```python
>>> d = {'a': 'hello, world', 'b': 11}  # Equivalent to `dict(a='hello, world', b=11)`
>>> type(d)
<class 'dict'>
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world', 'b': 11}

>>> d.keys()
dict_keys(['a', 'b'])
>>> d.values()
dict_values(['hello, world', 11])
>>> for k, v in d.items(): print(k, v)
a hello, world
b 11

>>> 'a' in d  # `O(1)`
True
>>> 1 in d
False
>>> d['a'] += '!'
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world!', 'b': 11}
>>> d[1] = 'a new element'
>>> d
{'a': 'hello, world!', 'b': 11, 1: 'a new element'}

>>> d[0] += 10  # `KeyError: 0`
>>> d.get(0, 1)  # Return `1` as default value since key `0` does not exist
1
>>> d.get(1, '?')  # Key `1` exists, so the actual value will be returned
'a new element'
>>> d.get(10) is None
True
```

## Heaps

The following commands show how to work with a `min heap`.
Currently, `Python` does not have public methods for the `max heap`.
You can overcome this problem by applying one of the following strategies:

1. Invert the value of each number. So, for example, if you want to add
   1, 2 and 3 in the min heap, you can `heappush` -3, -2 and -1.
   When you `heappop` you invert the number again to get the proper value.
   This solution clearly works if your domain is composed by numbers >= 0.
1. [Invert your object comparison](https://stackoverflow.com/a/40455775).

```python
>>> import heapq

>>> min_heap = [3, 2, 1]
>>> heapq.heapify(min_heap)
>>> min_heap
[1, 2, 3]

>>> min_heap = []
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 3)  # `O(log n)`
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 2)
>>> heapq.heappush(min_heap, 1)

>>> min_heap
[1, 3, 2]
>>> len(min_heap)
>>> min_heap[0]
1
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)  # `O(log n)`
1
>>> min_heap
[2, 3]

>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)
2
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)
3
>>> heapq.heappop(min_heap)  # `IndexError: index out of range`
```

### collections

Container datatypes ([collections package](<https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html>)).

#### collections.namedtuple

```python
>>> from collections import namedtuple

>>> Point = namedtuple('Point', 'x y')

>>> p0 = Point(1, 2)
>>> p0
Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0.x
1
>>> p0.y
2

>>> p1 = Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0 == p1
True

# Python >= 3.6.1
>>> from typing import NamedTuple

>>> class Point(NamedTuple):
        x: int
        y: int

>>> p0 = Point(1, 2)
>>> p1 = Point(x=1, y=2)
>>> p0 == p1
True
```

#### collections.defaultdict

```python
>>> from collections import defaultdict

>>> d = defaultdict(int)
>>> d['x'] += 1
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 1})
>>> d['x'] += 2
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 3})
>>> d['y'] += 10
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'int'>, {'x': 3, 'y': 10})

>>> d = defaultdict(list)
>>> d['x'].append(1)
>>> d['x'].append(2)
>>> d
defaultdict(<class 'list'>, {'x': [1, 2]})
```

#### collections.Counter

```python
>>> from collections import Counter

>>> c = Counter('abcabcaa')
>>> c
Counter({'a': 4, 'b': 2, 'c': 2})
>>> c.keys()
dict_keys(['a', 'b', 'c'])
>>> c.items()
dict_items([('a', 4), ('b', 2), ('c', 2)])
>>> for k, v in c.items(): print(k, v)
a 4
b 2
c 2
>>> c['d']  # It acts as a `defaultdict` for missing keys
0
```

#### collections.OrderedDict

```python
>>> from collections import OrderedDict

>>> d = OrderedDict()

>>> d['first'] = 1
>>> d['second'] = 2
>>> d['third'] = 3
>>> d
OrderedDict([('first', 1), ('second', 2), ('third', 3)])

>>> for k, v in d.items(): print(k, v)
first 1
second 2
third 3
```
